+++
title = "Sparse Conditional Constant Propagation"
extra.author = "Mark Anastos"
extra.author_link = "https://github.com/anastos"
extra.bio = """
  Mark Anastos is an undergraduate senior studying Computer Science and
  Electrical & Computer Engineering.
"""
+++

The goal of this project was to implement the sparse conditional constant
propagation optimization as a pass on programs in the intermediate language
[Bril][]. Sparse conditional constant propagation is a compiler optimization
that detects variables and expressions in a program that will always evaluate to
a fixed value, and computes their values at compile time rather than at runtime.
It is set apart from traditional constant propagation by its reliance on [static
single assignment (SSA) form][SSA] to improve the efficiency of the analysis
(sparse), and by its ability to detect control-flow edges which will never be
executed due to constant branch conditions (conditional).

## Motivation

As an example of constant propagation, consider the following block of Bril
code:

        a: int = const 1;
        b: int = add a a;
        cond: bool = const false;
        br cond then else;
    then:
        b: int = add b a;
    else:
        print b;

Any constant propagation analysis would be able to detect that the initial
defintion of `b` will always evaluate to the same value. As such, the addition
operation could be completed at compile time and replaced in the program with
`const 2`. Simple constant propagation does not make any conclusions about
control flow, and thus would be unable to determine whether or not the
instruction `b: int = add b a;` will be executed. However, by inspecting the
program, we can see that the branch condition is `false` and consequently the
instruction is [dead code][]. As such, the final value of `b` that is printed
will always be 2. Conditional constant propagation has this ability to reason
about branch conditions, and thus can optimize the entire block above to the
following three instructions:

        a: int = const 1;
        b: int = const 2;
        print b;

In fact, if the variable `a` is not used later on in the function, its
definition could be removed as well.

The example above is clearly contrived to show the capabilities of conditional
constant propagation. And so, it may not be obvious if and when this
optimization would truly be beneficial for real programs. Why would a program
contain code that will never be run? A common answer to this question is that
people often put code that is meant for debugging under conditionals. As such,
when the code is compiled with debugging disabled, all of that code is unneeded,
and can be removed through this optimization.

However, I think that a more important motivation for this optimization revolves
around the fact that it is operating on an intermediate language. People would
most likely not write programs directly in Bril, but instead they would write
them in some other, higher-level language and then compile them down to Bril
(and then to assembly). The compilation process could easily produce constant
values that are not fully evaluated or control-flow edges that are never
traversed. Other optimizations, such as [function inlining][], could produce
oportunities for conditional constant propagation if, for example, the function
arguments are constants. As such, this optimization could have significant
benefits even for programs without any obviously constant expressions.

## Implementation

Sparse conditional constant propagation was introduced by Wegman and Zadeck in
[Constant Propagation with Conditional Branches][SCCP] (1991). My
[implementation][] of the data-flow analysis is based on the description given
in that paper. The analysis works on programs in SSA form, and as such I also
needed to implement transformations on Bril programs to and from SSA form. After
running the analysis, I then needed to actually use the information that it
provides to replace computations with constant values and to eliminate dead code
where possible. I wrote the optimization in TypeScript in order to take
advantage of the pre-existing [type definitions][] for Bril, which are written
in that language. The optimization operates by taking in a Bril program (in the
canonical JSON representation) though standard input, and outputting the
optimized version of the program to standard output.

### SSA

After separating out the [basic blocks][] of a program and generating a
representation of the [control-flow graph][] (CFG), the first step in performing
sparse conditional constant propagation is to convert the program into SSA form,
in which each assignment is to a unique variable. In order to handle cases where
the value of a variable could be from multiple of its definitions, SSA
introduces a φ instruction (e.g. `x_2: int = phi x_0 x_1;`), which takes as many
arguments as there are in-edges to the block in the CFG, and assigns to the
destination one of the arguments in correspondance with the in-edge that the
block was entered through. In order to convert back out of SSA, these φ
instructions must be removed. In general, they can be removed by placing
assignments at the end of the predecessor nodes or along the edges. As an
example, the code block given in the motivation section would require one φ
instruction, as there are two definitions of `b` that [reach][] the print
statement:

        a: int = const 1;
        b_0: int = add a a;
        cond: bool = const false;
        br cond then else;
    then:
        b_1: int = add b_0 a;
    else:
        b_2: int = phi b_0 b_1;
        print b_2;

The conversion to SSA form is divided into two parts: inserting φ instructions
where necessary, and then renaming the variables to give each definition its own
variable name. The only places where φ instructions might be necessary for a
variable are in blocks on the [dominance frontier][] of definitions of the
variable. As such, in order to not add far too many instructions to the program,
I needed to compute the dominator tree of the control-flow graph.[^idom] To do
this I used the [Lengauer-Tarjan][] dominator tree algorithm. The number of φ
instructions could further be reduced by running a [live variable analysis][]
and only inserting them if the variable is live in that block. However I did not
do this as it does not matter for the effectiveness of the optimization and, I
believe, it would more likely than not make the optimization slower.

Typically, when converting back out of SSA form, you would need to consider each
SSA variable as independent and add assignment statements along the control-flow
edges. Converting to and directly back from SSA would then make a program, in
general, less efficient then the original.[^coalesce] However, during
implementation I realized that, specifically for this optimization, the fully
general conversion back from SSA is not necessary. This is because constant
propagation only ever decreases the live ranges of SSA variables, by replacing
their uses with constants or removing dead code. As such, the live ranges of SSA
variables that come from the same original variable will never interfere with
each other and can simply be renamed back to the original variable name. If this
SSA conversion were to be used for other optimizations that do not share this
property with constant propagation, the conversion back would need to be
modified.

### Constant Propagation

The primary component of the optimization is the constant propagation analysis
itself. I implemented it according to the worklist algorithm described in the
paper. Doing so was mostly straightforward. However, the paper seems to not
mention one point in the algorithm where it is necessary to add to the worklist,
which took a while for me to figure out.[^visit-phi] The output of the analysis
is a mapping from variables to elements of a lattice, which can be ⊤ (the
variable is undefined), ⊥ (the value is unknown), or a value (the variable is a
constant). Because the program is in SSA form, the analysis only needs one
lattice element per variable, instead of a lattice element for each variable at
each program point. The paper aludes to the fact that a constant propagation
analysis can gain information from control-flow branches. For example, for any
Bril branch, we can conclude that the condition variable is true on the first
out-edge and false on the second. I did not implement this, as it would require
keeping track multiple lattice positions per variable and would significantly
complicate the analysis.[^branches]

After completing the analysis, the next step is to use its results to actually
modify the code by replacing computations with constants and removing dead code.
Any block that is unreachable can simply be removed from the CFG. In fact, doing
this can create more dead code to remove if any variable defined elsewhere is
only used in removed blocks. The next step is to replace the expressions in
definitions of variables that are known to be constant with the constant value
itself. Similarly, this could also create more dead code. As such, the last step
is to remove any definitions of variables that have no uses. After this, the
program is converted back out of SSA form, the CFG is flattened back into a
single list of instructions, and the program is output in its standard JSON
form.

## Evaluation

It has proven difficult to evaluate the effectiveness of this optimization in a
manner that would accurately reflect its utility. Upon running the optimization
on several test cases, I have observed that, for programs that are written
directly by humans in Bril, the optimization tends to exhibit one of two
behaviors: either the program is effectively unchanged, or it is completely
evaluated leaving only assignments of constants to variables, and print
statements with those variables. By running these test cases, however, I have
been able to ensure that the optimization does not change the behavior of
well-typed Bril programs.

For example, of the test cases provided in the [bril-benchmark][] repository,
two (`factorial` and `fibonacci`) are completely unchanged by the optimization
modulo the order of basic blocks, and the other two (`matrix_mul` and
`poly_mul`) are completely evaluated to just constant assignments and print
statements. The factor that seems to separate these two classes of programs is
the existance or lack of loops. This is because, if there are no loops, then
every assignment statement occurs no more than once. As such, because vanilla
Bril has no channels through which data can enter a function from the outside,
every variable's value can be determined through the conditional constant
propagation analysis. When loops are involved, variables' values change between
iterations, and as such the analysis is unable to determine a constant value for
the variables.

I wrote a few programs in TypeScript, and used the <code>[ts2bril][]</code>
compiler to convert them to Bril. These converted programs are qualitatively
different from the handwritten programs, as the compiler inserts a lot of
short-lived variables in order to translate contructs from the TypeScript
language. Due to the high number of redundant variables, I believe a more
effective optimization for working on programs outputted by this compiler would
be [copy propagation][]. For a TypeScript program that prints the first 20
fibonacci numbers, the constant propagation optimization had the following
effect:

<div align="center">

| Instruction Count | Unoptimized | Optimized | Change |
|-------------------|------------:|----------:|-------:|
| Static            |          26 |        23 | –11.5% |
| Dynamic           |         410 |       388 |  –5.4% |

</div>

For this program, the optimization removed only three instructions, one of which
was in the loop body (an extraneous assignment to a variable that was never
used). In general, it is difficult to judge the effectiveness of this
optimization without the infrastructure of other optimizations and compilers to
pair it with. In the future, if someone were to implement, say, a function
inlining optimization, and were to extend this optimization to support function
calls, I would be interested to see the effect it would have.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^idom]: For the renaming step of the SSA conversion it was also necessary to
compute the immediate dominator of a node. As such the dominator tree was
computed instead of just the dominance relation.

[^coalesce]: The efficiency lost by adding assignments in the transformation
back from SSA can be regained though [move coalescing][] during register
allocation.

[^visit-phi]: In the function that the paper calls *Visit-φ*, if the lattice
position of the variable changes, you must add all uses of the variable to the
worklist.

[^branches]: You could imagine gaining a lot of information from looking at
branches in this way. For instance, in the following case, you could conclude
that `i` is 5 on the true edge of the branch:

        ...
        b: bool = eq i 5;
        c: bool = and a b;
        br c foo bar;


[Bril]: https://capra.cs.cornell.edu/bril/
[SSA]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Static_single_assignment_form
[dead code]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unreachable_code
[function inlining]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inline_expansion
[SCCP]: https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=103136
[implementation]: https://github.com/anastos/bril/blob/sccp/bril-ts/sccp.ts
[type definitions]: https://github.com/sampsyo/bril/blob/master/bril-ts/bril.ts
[basic blocks]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basic_block
[control-flow graph]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Control-flow_graph
[reach]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reaching_definition
[dominance frontier]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dominator_(graph_theory)
[Lengauer-Tarjan]: https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=357062.357071
[live variable analysis]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Live_variable_analysis
[move coalescing]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Register_allocation#Coalescing
[bril-benchmark]: https://github.com/xu3kev/bril-benchmark/tree/master
[ts2bril]: https://github.com/sampsyo/bril/blob/master/bril-ts/ts2bril.ts
[copy propagation]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Copy_propagation
