+++
title = "Compiler Optimizations for Improving Data Locality"
[extra]
latex = true
bio = """
Horace He
Gabriela C. Correa
"""
[[extra.authors]]
+++

Processing speed has long surpassed that of memory in modern computation.
Applications today deal with a massive amount of information that must at
some point be held in memory. The overhead cost of transferring data
continues to inhibit many. Furthermore, this task is becoming increasingly
complex as computers depart from von Neumann towards heterogeneous
architectures, inducing additional data transfer.

*Compiler Optimizations for Improving Data Locality* by Carr, McKinley, and
Tseng tackles this problem by suggesting this is a task for the compiler to
combat. This paper focuses on improving the order of memory access. Table 1
illustrates the differences in a computers circa this paper, and today. The
problems faced in 1994 are very much present today: data transfer is the main
limiting factor in computation.


|   	|Numerical Wind Tunnel   	| Summit  	|
|---	|---	|---	|
| Processing Speed Per Node   	| 1.7GF   	| 40TF  	|
| Data Transfer Speed  	| 421 MBps  	| 256 GBps  	|
| Memory Size Per Node   	| 1 GB   	| 96 GB HBM2, 512 GB DDR4, 1600 GB NV |
| Number of Nodes   	|166   	| 4608  	|
| Total Processing Speed   	| 280 GF   	| 200 PF  	|
| Total System Memory   	| 45 GB  	| > 10 PB  	|

This table shows the fastest computer from when this paper was written (1994) and from today (2019). Note that the processing speeds continue to significantly outperform memory speeds.

# Background!
#### Memory Hierarchy
*Data locality* takes advantage of smaller, faster, volatile cache memories, by
keeping data close at hand for computation. Reusing lines of cache—both
spatially and temporally—allow for computation to proceed without waiting
excessive periods of time for the data to arrive. Large and increasingly
complex memory hierarchies are implemented for a variety of reasons. Sadly,
not everything is fast cache 💸.

As opposed to a single central memory, a variety of technologies are used to
store information and prepare it for computation by CPUs, GPUs, or TPUs. Each
processing unit has registers at the cliff of computations. They are
typically the fastest, largely due to their close proximity to the logic unit
that performs computation. After registers, comes caches. These are also very
fast, yet limited in size—largely to take advantage of locality.

Beyond the physical memory storage are the interconnects between all
components. Slowest transfer speeds are found in the cheaper and more robust
main memory, solid state drives, hard disks, and long term tape system
storage. The further the data gets from the processing units, the less we
want to access it. It’s too far for the data to walk.

<insert memory hierarchy figure>
This figure shows a typical memory hierarchy. In considering memory speeds,
we must take into account the time it takes to get between storage, caches,
registers, processors—in addition to how much data can sit at each point on
the way.

Today, unified memory prevents the error-prone and time consuming process of
allocating and moving data between CPUs and GPUs [5]. This pretty much
handles the problems posed by Carr et al. in a very limited number of
systems. The memory is still physically separated, yet in Kepler and CUDA 6
unified memory is currently an option for developers.

#### Data Dependence
Data dependence is an important concept within this article, so here we’ll spend a bit of time discussing it. Goff et al. put it very nicely in their paper Practical Dependence Testing:

<insert data dependence image>

# Loop Optimizations
#### Loop Permutation
Loop Permutation is perhaps the most straightforward loop optimization.
Iterating over arrays in the wrong order is one of the easiest ways to cause
a huge amount of cache misses. It’s also the cause of an endless [number](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/33722520/why-is-iterating-2d-array-row-major-faster-than-column-major) of [SO](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/13093155/c-2d-array-access-speed-changes-based-on-ab-order)
[questions](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/9936132/why-does-the-order-of-the-loops-affect-performance-when-iterating-over-a-2d-arra).

Take these two snippets of code (can also be found online [here](http://ideone.com/PUJhdP)).

A. Column-Major
```
int A[DIM1][DIM2];
for (int iter = 0; iter < iters; iter++)
    for (int j = 0; j < DIM2; j ++)
        for (int i = 0; i < DIM1; i++)
            A[i][j]++;
```

B. Row-Major
```
int A[DIM1][DIM2];
for (int iter = 0; iter < iters; iter++)
    for (int j = 0; j < DIM2; j ++)
        for (int i = 0; i < DIM1; i++)
            A[i][j]++;
```

Both of these loops perform `DIM1 * DIM2` computation. The only difference is
whether they iterate through A in row-major or column-major order. What do
you think their performance difference is?

If you’re wise to the ways of cache locality, you might answer B. And for
suitably large values of `DIM1` and `DIM2`, you’d be right!

With DIM1=1024, DIM2=1024, and iters=1e3, we get an order of magnitude win for B!
A (Column-Major): 4916ms
B (Row-Major): 485ms

Loop permutation captures this optimization.

<insert cache lines figure, as well as explanation>

#### Loop Reversal
Loop Reversal simply reverses the order of a loop. This does 2 things. First,
it may allow the use of more efficient jump operations (for example, `JMPZ`).
Another thing it does is reverse data dependencies. This can serve as a kind
of canonicalization, and can also allow for other loop optimizations to be
applied. In their paper, loop reversal didn’t improve data locality in any of
their benchmarks.

#### Loop Fusion
Loading in each cache line takes a significant amount of time. If we have
multiple loops, we run into the possibility that we will load a single cache
line multiple times, wasting time.

For example, take (online example can be found [here](http://ideone.com/OnbRXU)).
```
for (int i = 0; i < MAXN; i++)
        A[i] += j;
for (int i = 0; i < MAXN; i++)
    A[i] *= j;
```
It’s easy to see that this code is performing redundant cache line loads. We
load the cache line that `A[0]` belongs to twice - once in the first loop and
once in the second. We can speed up this loop by fusing the loops. This way,
we load a cache line and perform both operations on it at once, before
loading another cache line.
```
for (int i = 0; i < MAXN; i++) {
    A[i] += j;
    A[i] *= j;
}
```
Locally, this gives me 660ms for the unfused one and 411ms for the fused one.

Loop fusion is a big deal on CPUs, but it’s an even bigger deal on GPUs (and
other hardware accelerators). As opposed to say, loop permutation, which
simply improves data locality, loop fusion can actually reduce the number of
memory loads needed. For example, in the above, it’s a trivial optimizations
to then rewrite it as

```
for (int i = 0; i < MAXN; i++) {
    int t = A[i];
    t += j;
    t *= j;
    A[i] = t;
}
```
This halving in memory loads can often translate directly to halving of
runtime in more memory bound systems (like GPUs).

#### Loop Fission/Loop Distribution
This is the opposite of loop fusion. Although loop fusion is useful if you
can reduce memory loads, it can be counter-productive to have unrelated
operations jammed together into a single loop nest. Not only does it
introduce more memory pressure, it also doesn’t allow optimizations like loop
permutation to be applied to a single operation at a time.

For example, take a loop like this
```
int A[MAXN][MAXN], B[MAXN][MAXN];
for (int i = 0; i < MAXN; i++) {
    for (int j=0; j<MAXN; j+=2) {
        A[i][j] ++;
        B[j][i] ++;
    }
}
```


As seen in the loop permutation section, we’d like to iterate along both A
and B in row-major order. However, the fact that the operations in A and B
are in one loop nest doesn’t make it possible to do this for both arrays.
However, if we split this loop, then we can write it like
```
int A[MAXN][MAXN], B[MAXN][MAXN];

for (int i = 0; i < MAXN; i++)
    for (int j=0; j<MAXN; j+=2)
        A[i][j]++;

for (int j=0; j<MAXN; j+=2)
    for (int i = 0; i < MAXN; i++)
        B[j][i]++;
```
Thus iterating in the optimal order for both arrays.

## Cost Model

For class discussion, think about the following algorithm:
<insert cost model picture>

#Future Work





