# What was the goal?
The goal of this project was to create an optimizer for a cross-database query compiler. A cross-database query, also known as federated query, is an SQL query that consists of tables that span across different, individual database systems.

## Federated Query Compilation Challenges
Cross-database query compilation rises a lot of interesting challenges, due to the heterogeneity of the underlying infrastructure. Some challenges that arise are the following:
1. How could the query plan be split to further subqueries and how the execution of these subqueries could be orchestrated across the different data sources in order to utilize the external data systems and take advantage of their powerful implementations (e.g. access methods and join algorithms)? 
2. Could we redefine the already existing operators (like join algorithms) and make them more efficient for the cross-database environment? 

In this project, we experimented with a cross-database query system called Spark SQL, we identified significant weaknesses related to the aforementioned, and we developed a cross-database query compiler that takes into account the heterogeneity of the underlying infrastructure and it's able to optimize the query with respect to each table location.

# What did you do?
We focused on two different aspects of this problem, and we present the implementations and some early experimental evaluation of both. The first part is the federated query compiler that optimizes each query by taking into account the underlying data sources. The second part is some experimentation with the current federated join algorithms. We identify some major performance issues to these join algorithms and we present a new implementation that can overcome these performance issues.

## The Self-Learned Federated Query Compiler
We developed a query compiler that optimizes input queries with respect to the underlying table locations. To explain how our optimizer works, let's take a look at the following example. Consider the query:

```SQL
SELECT AVG(A.salary)
FROM A, B, C
WHERE A.id = B.id
AND B.id = C.id
```
This query consists of a join between three tables: A, B and C. Let's assume three different data sources, namely DS1 and DS2 and assume the following table locations:

In relational algebra, this join would look like the following: 
`A ⋈ B ⋈ C`

# What were the hardest parts to get right?
# Were you successful? (Report rigorously on your empirical evaluation.)
