+++
title = "Project 2: Implement an Optimization"
+++
# Project 2: Implement an Optimization

- Proposal due: October 2, 2019
- Report due: October 23, 2019


## Overview

This project is about compiler optimization.
You can choose any optimization you can find in the literature.
You'll implement the optimization for [Bril][]—so in the end, your "deliverable" will be a program that reads and writes Bril programs.
The output program should do the same thing as the input program but be more efficient, for some definition of "efficient."

You must design and carry out a rigorous, thorough evaluation of your optimization.
You'll want to evaluate both the correctness and the efficiency.

[bril]: https://github.com/sampsyo/bril


## Ideas

Here are some compiler optimizations you might select:

* TK


## Doing the Project

To find an optimization to implement, I invite you to look around at the compilers literature and even textbooks from other courses.
Once you pick one, write your proposal (see the [general project instructions][project]) and link to any sources that describe what the optimization is all about.
More so than for [Project 1][p1], be sure to include a *detailed* plan for your evaluation.

Depending on your optimization, the base Bril language may not be rich enough and you may need to extend it.
That's absolutely fine—just be sure to describe what the extension will look like in your proposal.

You can choose whether to implement your optimization in [the central Bril repository][bril] or in your own repository, depending on how useful you think it will be to other projects.

In your report (see the [general instructions][project] again), be sure the describe how you bridged the gap between the "theoretical" version of the optimization that you read in the literature and your real-world implementation.
Give lots of detail on your experimental setup, your benchmarking approach, and the empirical results you gathered.
While writing, keep your audience in mind: you're publishing this as a public blog post, so make it accessible to the technically-sophisticated public.

[monorepo]: https://gomonorepo.org
[pr]: https://help.github.com/en/articles/about-pull-requests
[turnt]: https://github.com/cucapra/turnt
[capra]: https://capra.cs.cornell.edu
[project]: @/project/_index.md
[p1]: @/project/1.md
