+++
title = "Project 3: Write an LLVM Pass"
+++
# Project 3: Write an LLVM Pass

- Proposal due: October 30, 2019
- Report due: November 13, 2019


## Overview

The point of Project 3 is to learn to use the [LLVM][] compiler infrastructure.
The scope is similar to [Project 1][p1], i.e., small: you don't need to make anything too ambitious; just build something that works and evaluate it rigorously.

The end result of your project should be an LLVM [pass][llvm pass]—a thing that reads or transforms LLVM IR programs.
Unless you have a very good reason not to, you will implement your pass in C++ so you have access to the full power of the LLVM API.
Unlike in Project 1, your pass needs to work on full-scale, real-world programs rather than just on small tests.

To understand the scope of Project 3, think back to [Project 1][p1], where you built something cool for [Bril][].
Project 3 is like that, with some important differences:

- LLVM, because it is an industrial-strength compiler, is harder to use than Bril, which is an educational toy.
- You don't want to propose to extend the LLVM language, which would take a lot of time to implement. And it already has stuff like pointers and floating-point numbers, of course!
- Because the LLVM language is so large and complete, you won't want to propose a project that requires you to completely address every possible LLVM instruction. For example, building a backend would be a bad idea.
- Your choice of language is constrained: you really want to use C++ for this project. (Don't worry; in Project 4, you can go back to using whatever language you want.)
- There are not many Bril programs in the world yet, so you didn't have access to full-scale applications in your evaluation. That excuse won't work in Project 3; your evaluation will probably need to use full-scale, real-world programs.

Finally, for simplicity, we're requiring that projects be implemented as _passes_ on LLVM IR.
Your pass need not actually transform the IR; implementing an analysis that generates warnings or errors, for example, is in scope.
But building a new frontend that emits LLVM IR is out of scope.

[llvm]: https://llvm.org
[llvm pass]: http://llvm.org/docs/WritingAnLLVMPass.html
[bril]: https://github.com/sampsyo/bril/


## Ideas

TK


## Doing the Project

TK

[project]: @/project/_index.md
[p1]: @/project/1.md
