+++
title = "Project 4: Implement Something"
+++
# Project 4: Implement Something

- Proposal due: November 20, 2019
- Report due: December 18, 2019


## Overview

The final 6120 project is the most open ended one of the semester.
You will design, implement, and evaluate a language implementation effort of your choice.
The requirements are that the project must be about language implementation (not, for example, about formalizing language semantics or about implementing a deep neural network) and it must have a rigorous, convincing empirical evaluation.

Unlike on the pages for previous [projects][project], there is no "ideas" section here.
Designing the research is up to you.
But here are some general directions you might consider:

- Reproduce one of the papers that we read during the semester—or one aspect thereof.
- Do something more elaborate with LLVM than you did in [Project 3][p3]. In the limit, consider implementing an optimization pass that real-world users might actually want to adopt.
- Exploit your ongoing research. If it's already about language implementation, then just pick a scope so that the implementation and evaluation can fit within the project boundaries. If it's not, then tack on a language implementation angle to make it fit the 6120 topic.
- Extend your [Project 1][p1] implementation so it takes on a more researchy flavor and evaluate it with a serious benchmark suite.

As always, the output of your project consists of open-source code and a post on the course blog.
See the [general project instructions][project] for details.

[project]: @/project/_index.md
[p1]: @/project/1.md
[p3]: @/project/3.md
