+++
title = "Global Value Numbering"
[extra]
bio = """
  [Alexa VanHattum][] is a second-year student interested in the intersection of compilers and formal methods. She also enjoys feminist book clubs and cooking elaborate [fish truck][] meals.

  [Gregory Yauney][] is a second-year student working on machine learning and digital humanities.
  
[alexa vanhattum]: https://www.cs.cornell.edu/~avh
[gregory yauney]: https://www.cs.cornell.edu/~gyauney
[fish truck]: https://www.triphammermarketplace.com/events/
"""
[[extra.authors]]
name = "Alexa VanHattum"
link = "https://www.cs.cornell.edu/~avh"
[[extra.authors]]
name = "Gregory Yauney"
link = "https://www.cs.cornell.edu/~gyauney"
+++

### Overview

Q. Why GVN?

```
void main(x : int, y : int) {
entry:
  z1 : int = add x y;
  jmp block;
block:
  z2 : int = add x y;
  ret;
}
```

## SSA

Difficulties:
- Dominator tree: we needed the direct children (immediate dominators), not the entire dominance relation. We ran the transitive reduction on the dominance relation.
- We only add a phi node for a variable if that variable is defined more than once.
- Whether to start with phi nodes with duplicated arguments or to add them as we processed the node. We keep track of where the phi argument sources are from.
- Design decision: we also store source blocks for phi arguments.
- Found in `test/gvn/constant-folding-tau-example.bril`: Our implementation requires us to declare variables at a higher scope.

## Global value numbering

### Copy propagation

### Constant folding

Difficulties:
- Recursively visiting blocks in the dominator tree in reverse post order is not enough to ensure that a phi node's arguments have been processed in the absence of backedges. We also had to sort the immedately dominated blocks by their order in the CFG.
- Can't do constant propagation because Bril operations require registers as operands.
- `examples/gvn/constant-folding-calpoly-example.bril`: There's a division by zero when running constant folding, but the compiler shouldn't crash! We filed an issue with Bril's local value numbering and fixed our implementation.


## Evaluation


1. Correctness

### Briggs, Cooper, and Simpson

Our implementation does not produce the same output as LLVM on all tests because 1) Bril operations require that all operands are registers and 2) LLVM GVN has more features.

The following example, from [Value Numbering][], by Briggs, Cooper, and Simpson, illustrates how GVN removes redundant instructions across basic blocks:

```
void main(a0 : int, b0 : int, c0 : int, d0 : int, e0 : int, f0 : int) {
B1:
  u0 : int = add a0 b0;
  v0 : int = add c0 d0;
  w0 : int = add e0 f0;
  cond : bool = const true;
  br cond B2 B3;
B2:
  x0 : int = add c0 d0;
  y0 : int = add c0 d0;
  jmp B4;
B3:
  u1 : int = add a0 b0;
  x1 : int = add e0 f0;
  y1 : int = add e0 f0;
  jmp B4;
B4:
  u2 : int = phi u0 u1 B2 B3;
  x2 : int = phi x0 x1 B2 B3;
  y2 : int = phi y0 y1 B2 B3;
  z0 : int = add u2 y2;
  u3 : int = add a0 b0;
}
```

Our implementation removes the redundant additions in blocks `B2` and `B3`. It also removes from block `B4`: 1) the meaningless phi node `u2 : int = phi u0 u1 B2 B3;`, which has arguments that are always equal, and 2) the redundant phi node `y2 : int = phi y0 y1 B2 B3;`, which is identical to the phi node that precedes it.  Here is the full output, which matches the correct output in the paper:

```
void main(a0 : int, b0 : int, c0 : int, d0 : int, e0 : int, f0 : int) {
B1:
  u0: int = add a0 b0;
  v0: int = add c0 d0;
  w0: int = add e0 f0;
  cond: bool = const true;
  br cond B2 B3;
B2:
  jmp B4;
B3:
  jmp B4;
B4:
  x2: int = phi v0 w0 B2 B3;
  z0: int = add u0 x2;
  ret ;
}
```

### Copy propagation

```
int main(a : int) {
entry:
  b : int = id a;
  c : int = id b;
  d : int = id c;
  print d;
}
```

### Constant folding

```
int main() {
entry:
  a : int = const 1;
  b : int = const 2;
  c : int = add a b;
  print c;
}
```

2. Trying to get fewer instructions.

We compared the numbers of instructions in the original Bril programs in SSA form and in the same programs after running GVN and trivial dead code elimination (TDCE).

| Test program | Original | SSA form | After only LVN | After only GVN |
| :---        |    :----:   | :----: |  :----: |
| `test/gvn/constant-folding-tau-example.bril` | 26 | 37 | 37 | 35 |
| `test/gvn/constant-folding-calpoly-example.bril` | 27 | 25 | 25 | 22 |
| `test/gvn/add-commutativity.bril` | 6 | 6 | 6 | 5 |
| `test/gvn/copy-propagation.bril` | 5 | 6 | 6 | 3 |
| `test/gvn/constant_propagation.bril` | 5 | 6 | 6 | 4 |
| `test/gvn/across-basic-blocks.bril` | 8 | 8 | 8 | 7 |


3. Bigger benchmarks with TypeScript frontend and comparison with LVN

Difficulty:
- The code generated by the TypeScript frontend sometimes inserts `jmp` instructions after returns in the same basic block. We had to manually remove these in order for SSA conversion and dominator tree creation to work.

4. LLVM GVN tests that use more features than Bril has.

GVN provides the base for a number of additional optimizations, most of which we have not yet implemented.

[value numbering]: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.36.8877&rep=rep1&type=pdf

